OK, so, as you know, I recently agreed to do a FAQ video,
which means I answer some questions of Internet users.
So, I don't know if it's such a good idea because we received more than 3000 questions
and... it wasn't a lot of fun for Antoine who had to sort them.
He put them in order and tried to link them to the appropriate documents,
because we have a document that we open whenever you ask a precise question,
it is "L'Avenir en commun" ("Common future"), our program, and later on, I will show you some booklets.
So we looked for answers in the book ... We have to prepare this, don't we?
I took the questions on top of the stack, OK? It's the only criterion, and now I'll try to answer your questions.
I'll try to be quick, otherwise we'll be there forever and a day,
and as you know, I like to explain things in details, but it's not a good idea for this kind of exercise.
So... Depending on your reactions, I'll see what I'll need to improve,
but I must say it's quite extraordinary to receive 3000 questions.
It enables us to have a dialogue that is maybe more interesting than more formal discussions.
So thank you for giving me this idea, really, because it is a thought-provoking exercise for my work.
OK, let's begin!
So Martin asks:
"You said on many occasions that one of your first measures would be to establish a constituent assembly.
How do you intend to initiate and organize this process?"
So... First, it's in the program, and we consider that if people elect me, it means that they agree with this idea.
And to me, this is a key idea because... It's important to understand that... What is it that makes a people?
It's the fact that people decide laws together and obey the laws even when they don't agree with them.
When I disagree with laws that I dont like, well I still disagree with them, but I obey them.
So I struggle for their repeal, for modifications, and sometimes, I try to convince people not to vote for them,
but I accept to obey them.
So the rules of the game are very important, because they have a direct consequence:
you relinquish your freedom, which means you give up the possibility of doing what you want,
because you decide to obey the law.
So... You could argue that when you don't obey the law, you are punished.
OK, but obeying the law is also a personal principle.
There are other rules you disagree with which you obey.
So it is crucial.
This was my first point. Now my second point is that a people builds itself... It becomes a people.
It's not only because we have borders that we are French!
We are French even beyond our borders, right? So what could it be?
I already said it a hundred times! It is not a skin color, it is not a religion,
because there are all the religions and skin colors in this country,
etc etc. It's not even the french language, because it is an official language in 29 countries or so.
It's really the law that we have in common
and the rules that frame the making of laws that define us as a people.
So the constituent assembly is the assembly that is convened to decide the rules of the game,
and the rules of the game, it's the constitution. It organizes public authorities, guarantees civil liberties, etc etc.
So it is a key aspect to me. Besides, it is the core of my revolutionary strategy.
How should we proceed to transform society radically?
There are several ways to do this. For instance, you could decide to use clubs and rifles to do this,
or you could establish a dictatorship.
But there's another method: voting, and getting citizens involved.
But that's not the easiest part! How long do you think people will stay involved?
"One day, two days, maybe three days, and then what? Not every day!"
Well in a way, yes. We need to stay on the lookout, we need to stay well-informed.
People are ready to do that. It's not the case anymore, but in the past,
everybody watched the news on TV to get information. When there was a good documentary on TV, everyone watched it.
Now people pick up information here and there, but they do it wisely
They try to find documentation, to form an opinion on such and such issue.
You see, there is an opportuny to act on public matters on the long term.
To put it simply, the constitution has to create the people.
You might say "Well the French people already exist!" Tatata! Don't be so sure!
Of course they do, everyone has an ID, and we're French.
But feeling that we are bound by a common future is not the same, we have to build this!
We need this moment when we bind together as a people.
We need to write a new constitution in order to define our relations toward one another and the rights we have.
I already witnessed experiences of constituent assemblies in Latin America.
They really were impressive because there were real debates.
In Ecuador, they even changed the place of the assembly.
Instead of setting the assembly in Quito, the equivalent of Paris, they chose another city.
People went there. There were processions to present the demands of the people to the deputies of the constituent assembly,
An office gathered these demands and tried to turn them into articles of the constitution,
then people discussed them and voted.
Also, when Venezuela changed its constitution, authorities printed articles of the constitution on rice and pasta bags
in order to get people involved and have them discuss the articles at home. Isn't it a good idea?
And all this had the effect of getting people involved and making them think.
As for us, the current constitution of 1958 changed a lot,
it really comes from another era! I mean... it was 1958!
It was the end of colonial wars and... France was a very rural country.
Now France is a completely urban country, and thankfully, colonial wars are over.
We are involved in military interventions, but not in conflicts
that involve the whole population as before.
And above all, the population is much younger, much more mixed culturally, much more educated...
Because the school system is often criticized, and some people really think that it's not worth a dime
and that the French are just a bunch of illiterate and ignorant people, but that's not true!
The education level is way higher everywhere,
and waves of immigration transformed the French people, so much so that it is now a new people.
It's a quick process, you know?
For instance, few of my grandparents were French, but you can see that I am a fervent patriot.
I'm saying all this to explain that a people writes a constitution in order to build itself.
So how does a constituent assembly work? First, it's in the program, it's the first measure, so you can't miss it.
If I become President, I'll use Article 11 of the current constitution
in order to initiate a referendum on the establishment of a constituent assembly.
That's the first part. Then once the French people voted yes, we'll establish the assembly.
It is not the same as the National Assembly, it is a different assembly,
and there will be rules to choose the deputies of this assembly.
First, you will not be able to become a member of the constituent assembly if you have already been a member of a previous assembly.
Why is that? Not because I want to accuse those who have already been elected.
We just want a fresh look on the future constitution, with people who never got involved in public affairs,
people who think. They will have their own background of course, but it will be new for them,
they'll examine the situation and say: "Well here's what we should do in a normal country",
and not: "Well, that's the way I was elected the last time".
OK, so you understood what I said.
So one part of the assembly has to be elected, and I propose to draw lots to choose the rest of the assembly.
This leads me to another question. Someone asked:
So his pseudonym is "That's so nuclear"...
I just can't get used to these pseudonyms... Anyway!
So "That's so nuclear", "@slowbrain" (pun with "kite")...
OK... "@slowbrain"
"What is your opinion on drawing lots, that remains the most democratic way of selecting people?"
Well no, it's not THE most democratic mean. That's not true.
It's a democratic mean among others.
When you draw lots, you hope that you will statistically obtain a fair representation
of all the points of views in society. I understand this idea.
By the way, when we established the first representative assembly of "La France Insoumise" in Lille,
we drew lots to choose 2/3 of the members, so I'm not afraid of this method.
But these 2/3 did at least agree with one idea: the candidate for the election, me.
There has to be a minimum of consent to draw lots.
So we'll draw lots to choose some members, and the rest will be elected. Why is that?
Well it's because some problems cannot be solved by drawing lots.
There has to be people who express and defend their opinion,
and then people say: "Yes, well, he said that, the other guy said that,  and this woman defends another thesis..."
We give it some thinking! And then the people we chose by drawing lots show their good faith,
they think, they hear contradictory opinions and settle the matter.
So if we want to make a choice between different opinions, we have to elect some of the members of the assembly.
To take the example of the constitution, some people advocate a parliamentary system.
All right? It means that the Parliament has the final say under any circumstances, it organizes everything.
Other people advocate a presidential system.
They think the President should have extensive powers,
although he has to be under the control of the assembly.
And there are people who think it has to be an in-between solution.
For instance, the President could have extensive powers
but he could be removed from office at any moment
and the assembly could show it disapproves of his action or whatnot.
We need to discuss all this, don't we ?
And to tell you the truth, I advocate a parliamentary system,
but sometimes, I think: "Well, I should listen to  other people's opinions".
Anyway,!
This is the reason why we will not only draw lots.
We need to elect representatives and to choose representative by drawing lots.
Of course, the most important aspect is the gender parity in the assembly,
there has to be as many women as there are men,
and in this, drawing lots is very useful.
It will enable us to have a fair representation of the social diversity of the country.
Without it, you will get the same people who already had the courage to stand as candidates.
I know that!
I come from this system, so I know what we're dealing with.
So you're right to insist on the fact that we need to draw lots.
Now "Mehdi la Suède" - why not - says:
"How should the process of the constituent assembly take place?"
Well, I just explained this process: first, a referendum, we convene an assembly,
we make elections, we draw lots, and this assembly doesn't meet in the National Assembly but somewhere else.
Someone else says:
"How do you intend to implement your program if you leave office right after a constituent assembly was established?"
I never said I would resign - Mehdi Hussain said that.
When I become President, I will be elected within the framework of the 5th Republic,
and I'll use an article from the constitution of the 5th Republic to convene the constituent assembly
that will meet and work, and while it does that,
while it writes a new constiution, I'll be the President.
And I hope that there will be a majority of "La France Insoumise" deputies in the National Assembly
to support the government's decisions.
that I will appoint in accordance with the constitution of the 5th Republic.
Thus, we'll get started right away, as soon as we take office,
a lot of measures will be ready.
And then when the constituent assembly finishes its work,
the text will be presented to the French people,
the French people vote yes, then this text immediately comes into effect,
and I will no longer be President so that the new institutions may come into effect.
I won't spin a yarn, you know.
I'm not going to tell you: "You just wrote a new constitution that does not apply to me".
Of course it will apply to me!
So if the French people vote yes, then this constitution will apply to me and I'll leave office.
Maybe I'll stand as a candidate again, but I don't think so.
Anyway, that's the way it'll happen.
There won't be any break and I won't leave office a week after I'm elected
and say goodbye while you'll have to start from scratch.
That's not the way it'll happen! I will implement the policies from my program as long as I'll be in office
because the French people will have decided that.
But I'll have a say in this constituent assembly.
The difficulty is that I cannot say:
"I propose to elect a constituent assembly
but I, Jean-Luc Mélenchon, I'm going to tell you what the constitution will be".
Some people want to do that. They say they'll propose a constitution, and there will be a vote on this text.
This was General De Gaulle's method,
but that's not our method, we don't intend to organize a plebiscite!
There has to be a debate, people have to fight for their opinions,
they have to argue and make their own opinion.
We should not be afraid of debating, of having contradictory opinions.
Sometimes, the debate heats up, so what?
It gets cooler after a while, we're not savages, are we?
As for me, I'll make propositions during the constituent process,
but I won't tell you what you have to put in the constitution.
One of my propositions concerns the guarantee of civil liberties,
like the right to abortion ,
or the right to die with dignity and to decide when we want to die.
This means that you are the owner of your body and of your conscience.
Do you hear me folks? Your body!
You are the only owner of your body. It doesn't belong to other people, to your family, your husband or your children.
It belongs to you.
It's very important, it is the supreme civil liberty.
And this goes for the right to abortion and for assisted suicide.
But you know, as things go quickly, I'd rather be clear.
I never said that I advocated abortion, I advocate the right to abortion. It's not the same thing!
I know the problem of abortion doesn't arises differently for everyone,
depending on your life, on your personality or on the context etc.
Likewise, when I say that I advocate assisted suicide, it doesn't mean that I want you to commit suicide,
or that I want to commit suicide, that's not the issue here!
I'm saying this because people always exaggerate my ideas.
No sooner did I finish a sentence that someone says something that makes a debate impossible.
So I spoke about these fundamental liberties, but I have a third proposition, it is the green rule,
which consists in forbidding to exploit the resources of the earth more than it can regenerate them.
It would compel us to come up with good ideas to change our ways of producing.
There's also another idea that I find very important, it is the right to dismiss elected representatives.
And I mean every representatives. We should be able to dismiss them.
To do that, we would use the method of the recall referendum.
A number of citizens who say: "No, this guy can't remain in office any longer!"
That guy is even worse! Just look at what he did! He lied to us, he betrayed and fooled us".
I'm not accusing anyone, you can find them by yourselves.
OK, so a recall referendum consists in gathering a number of signatures, a million for instance,
or maybe two, to overthrow the President of the Republic,
50,000 for a regional councillor... You got the point, right?
And when you have enough signatures and signatories' polling card number,
well we can organize a referendum: should he stay or should he go? That's it!
Some people told me: "But people are are going to vote everyday!" Well, no, people aren't so stupid.
First, you won't find one or two million signature just like that!
You see? People should stop giving extreme examples to prevent ideas from progressing.
It enables the people to have an eye on their representatives all the time,
but it also gives stability to institutions.
Because don't tell me that we'll run a great country like France
with the system of the permanent general assembly, because I'm not buying it, it's not possible.
How long should it take to establish a constituent assembly?"
We'll do it quickly! we just need the time to establish the new assembly.
There's a six-week period between the first round of the presidential election and the first round of the parliamentary elections,
four weeks if we start counting from the second round.
After that, we have to take office and then have the National Assembly vote the organization of a constituent assembly,
so around September 2017, we'll be able to organize the election of the constituent assembly.
Now it's written that there's a "funny question". Why is that?
@Luccio asks me: "Where does your swag come from?"
Well...
It's natural, that's why.
@Christophe Geoffroy: "Conferences, public meetings, visits, interviews, videos, written articles...
Where does your energy come from?"
I don't know... I really don't.
But let me tell you that when I relax...
I can sleep for 12 or 13 hours, you should know that.
But I haven't done that for a very long time.
I think that when you do things passionately, and when people react positively...
I mean I have to tell it like it is, when I talk to people, they react positively,
they're kind and friendly for the most part.
I don't know if there are many countries in which a candidate to a presidential election
that comes third or fourth in the polls - I come third right now -
can take the metro alone without being accompanied by bodyguards. Is there a country where it is possible? Well in France it is!
And yet it is the country of moaners!
The French are always described as a bunch of savages abroad.
When you hear what the English say about us, you'd think our country is a jungle.
Well, yes, it is a jungle, there are all sorts of cool ways of life here.
Of course, we are just the way we are in this country,
but for the most part, people are rather kind and pleasant, those I see in the subway at least.
Maybe people who don't take the subway are unpleasant.
For instance, when I walk in the street, I see people honking like lunatics for no reason.
But people in the subway don't do that, and everything goes fine.
@ET.G: "Did you read the manga comic 'Jean-Luc Mélenchon No Revolution', and what do you think of it?"
Yes, I did.
It didn't take much time to read it, because there are balloons.
In French, they are called "phylactères".
I liked the author's drawings and the offbeat aspect of this comic.
Besides it's an honor. It's not everyone that has a manga comic about them!
In the story, I ruthlessly fight my enemies, it's in my nature.
The author perfectly understood how determined I am.
I am grateful to David Chabant, I am very flattered that he wrote a manga comic about me,
and I'm mad at my staff because they stole the only copy I had from me.
I lost the only copy I had, and the author still hasn't sent me the comic with his inscription on it,
I hope he'll get the message.
Also, I'd be really happy if he offered me a strip. I would have it framed
and I would put it at home, in my living room maybe.
I mean, there aren't so many people who have a comic about them.
"Do you intend to impose the use of Quinoa..."
Honestly, @Teddy Bear...
Was that question that necessary?
"Do you intend to impose the use of quinoa in school canteens if by the greatest of miracles you happened to..."
I do feel like the question is critical! Let me resume.
"Do you intend to impose the use of quinoa in school canteens if by the greatest of miracles you happened to be elected?"
First, it wouldn't be a miracle if I was elected, it would be the result of an election,
and let me tell you that an election isn't a miracle.
Besides, would it be the greatest of miracles? No, it would not.
There are even greater miracles like walking on water, but I'm not capable of that.
Apparently, very few people had the power to do that in the course of history.
Do I intend to impose the use of quinoa?
Let's suppose that I answered yes. I can see the headlines already: "Mélenchon wants to impose the use of quinoa!"
I talked about quinoa because I want people to understand that we have to stop consuming meat proteines.
Suppose I said: "We have to stop using meat proteins!"
I would then give you statistics, but people would get bored and say "Next!"
Of course you would!
Especially if I added that we have to use vegetable proteins only.
Your head would swell and you just could not stand it any longer.
So I talked about quinoa, I showed the way I cook it, and I said that we couldn't continue to use meat proteins.
And it worked well, because right after the interview, a pack of journalists started dressing me down
barking: "Look! Mélenchon became a vegetarian!"
but I'm not a vegetarian, I just try to eat as little meat proteins as possible.
What matters is that it makes people think: "The guy is right!
We don't want to keep eating all this meat
at the expense of animals that go through atrocious suffering.
Besides, it's not healthy, and the meat quality is poor because it is knacker's meat.
Got it? So I won't impose the use of quinoa, but I'll force you to think about it.
As for school canteens, it is true that we will impose 100% organic food on them.
We need to use 100% organic food from local productions.
How come you just can't find anyone that grows carrots for 150 miles around
wherever you may be in the country! Did you know that?
Well inform yourselves about carrots and you'll see.
"Cannabis legalization"
"@Lord nal... nagalfar"
Lord! How humble!
"Considering the good results obtained by the countries in which it was implemented,
what is your opinion on cannabis legalization, in all its aspects?"
Yes, you mean smoking joints and not just the medical use?
That's what you mean, right? You're just afraid to put it like this, am I wrong, Lord Nagalfar?
Come on! Don't be such a chicken!
Now, the next question is from "@Mokritzy"... No! "@MokritZKy"!
"A lot of people" - don't be so sure! -
"wonder if we should we legalize it or not? And why?"
OK!
"@Miyajacky":
Hello, and thank you. Do you think cannabis legalization could be economically and socially beneficial to France?"
First, I don't care if it's good on the social and economic level.
What matters is to deal with the use of cannabis as a public health problem.
I am not in favor of the use of cannabis, but I am in favor of its legalization
because I am against the use of cannabis. That's my first point.
When a substance is forbidden, it is not possible to campaign against it.
It is logic. By the way, you see all sorts of horrific campaigns against the use of tobacco,
but you never see campaigns that say: "Look pals, if you smoke too much marijuana bla bla,
it's going to ruin your health". Because it does!
I'm talking about the recreational use of marijuana, not about other types uses
like therapeutic, psychologic uses or whatnot.
So, to me, it is important that we be able to campaign against the use of marijuana,
but to do that, we have to legalize it.
It's as simple as that!
If you want to make prevention campaigns, then you have to legalize it!
If you don't, if you're satisfied with today's terrific situation...
People have to find all sorts of ways to hide a few grams!
If you happen to be arrested with a few grams of hashish,
then it's the end of the world and you're immediately sent to the police station.
And if in addition to that you are caught sticking posters
or making unpleasant graffitis on the walls, well your punishment is even more severe,
because you are considered a suspicious person!
I mean, let's be serious!
This trade forms the basis for huge traffics,
and it is a waste of time for policemen,
it is a waste of time for judges, who could use this time for other objectives.
This explains why you'll be satisfied if you're in favor of legalization, but also disappointed,
I am absolutely opposed to the use of marijuana, which is why I want to legalize it.
And don't call me a hypocrit!
The hypocrisy is the ban on cannabis, when everyone knows that the use of marijuana is widely spread.
People smoke it everywhere, and there's no way to stop it!
I will be called a hypocrit because my way of fighting it is legalization,
but no one says how hypocritical it is when there's a marijuana traffic on your block and that...
What do you do in this case, pal? Do you call the police to make it stop the traffic?
No, you don't! You even buy some!
So enough! Enough with hypocrisy! It is a waste of time and a waste of money!
It ruins people's health! We have to get down to business now!
I hope my answer will initiate a debate.
To tell you the truth, I must admit it took me some time to come to this conclusion.
I used to think that legalizing the use of marijuana amounted to encouraging it.
Now you know.
And some of my friends came to tell me: "Don't do that! You're crazy!"
But on the contrary, I think that I'd be crazy to say we should carry on like that.
Let me explain how I came to this conclusion.
I read some articles with different points of view about this issue, but not only French articles.
I read articles from different countries, experiences in different countries, and they convinced me.
Of course, I'm ready to hear contrary opinions, but since you asked my opinion, I give it to you.
Now "@JesuisSousCôté" says:
"What made you want to make videos on Youtube? Do you work on your own?"
Well it's quite pathetic actually.
At first, I was tired. I did not have time, often.
I mean I was under pressure. I write articles on my blog every week.
So the whole planet laughs at me because I probably write the longest blog articles in the world.
They're about 30,000 characters long when they're concise,
and 40,000 characters long the rest of the time!
I basically write the equivalent of a book every two months!
My articles amount to a book.
So I feel stressed when I did everything I had to, because I know I have to get behind my keyboard
for two hours or more. It takes a lot of time!
Besides, my staff gives me notes, drafts sometimes, but mostly notes,
and then I do a synthesis, and I keep it in mind as I write.
So I decided we would do things differently. I set a camera on my desk
and I thought I would record all that on my computer.
To be honest, this was not reasonable, so I stopped.
I therefore asked Antoine Nicolas for help. He works with me on these issues.
He tried to make me understand nicely that I just could not do it, and that it would not be good if I did that on my own.
I did one or two videos behind my computer, but I got it now, it's over!
Besides, I had to show my appartment, and it always took me 2 hours to find the proper angle!
It was really bad, so we decided to do as we do now.
So we got started! I told Antoine: "Look, let's get down to business, I need to do a weekly review".
So that's the way it started! We weren't really prepared. I just prepared my topics, read my notes,
and poof, we got to work! And now I'm used to it!
Speaking is not the hardest part for me, it's easier than writing.
That's the way we had the idea, and then I...
In the beginning, I watched some Youtubers' videos, and I liked it.
I don't want to make people jealous, so I won't say who, but I did, and some of them were really funny.
So I got started, and besides, some of my friends started to do the same.
So I had a look at the work of my relatives, like Danielle Simonnet's videos for instance.
I was really impressed!
I liked it, and besides, I felt freer in the way I worked. So that's how I got the idea!
Do I work on my own? No, I don't. There's Antoine Nicolas...
and other friends, but I did not ask them if they wanted me to give their names, so I won't say who they are.
There's the guy behind the camera for instance. I won't say his name, but he's there.
We are... Two persons help me.
After we filmed, they spend hours editing the videos. The videos look like there aren't any interruptions, but that's not the case actually.
I need to stop to drink, to answer the phone when my damn phone won't stop ringing,
which makes me think something serious happened. You know what I mean!
This was my answer, dear @JesuisSousCôté!
Now @Bridd asks:
"What made ya wanna be a Youtuber?"
I just answered the question!
I thought it was easy, but I was wrong!
Being a Youtuber is complicated.
I'm saying this for those who think you just need to sit and talk to your camera for hours.
There's preparation, there's work while we film,
and there's work after that, because we have to edit the videos. It's a lot of work!
I'd like it to be natural but it's not possible!
@Pierre Fournier:
"Could your Youtube channel become important enough to make you abandon the traditional media?"
So...
Dear Pierre, you just put your finger on a strategy that we are working on.
We've been working on this for months.
The idea is that we need to be able to bypass the official media system, because it stands like a wall!
Of course, it's not an absolutely smooth wall, there are niches where you're free to talk,
but for the most part, it's full of traps and ambushes all the time.
They say: "Come, we'll ask you questions about your program", but in reality they don't ask me anything.
They just want me to comment on such and such person, and sometimes, someone suddenly appears and asks a question although he was not supposed to.
In the traditional media, you always feel like you're taking an oral exam. They ask me:
"Do you know how many legs a centipede has?", so I say "Yes, yes, a hundred",
"No! It's 785! You want to be President of the Republic and you don't even know that?!"
Well no, I didn't! You always feel like you're taking an oral exam in a prestigious university. It allows a caste to reproduce itself
because you end up thinking: "Well I'm not like them, I don't know everything".
But they do not know everything, they just learned their notes, that's all!
In this manner, they create a void around them, and no one dares to do anything!
So you see people with incredible jobs that require skills and knowledge
who feel ashamed and confused, but who makes them feel like that?
Just a bunch of showmen who ask the same questions to everyone!
Anyway, I'm not going to criticize the media system right now.
The media system is above all a machine that crushes human beings, journalists in particular,
who are poorly paid and whose contracts are temporary and uneven.
It is also a machine that puts people in a box.
By the way, you should notice that they ask the same questions to everyone, so the system manufactures the public opinion.
It is so true that when I attend meetings, some people tell me:
"So some people will ask you questions", and what are these questions?
The same questions that the journalists ask me! So I end up thinking it's not worth it,
if I have to answer these questions, I'd better do it on TV.
So the idea is to bypass the system, but that's easy to say.
Some people were categorical and told me "Don't go to TV or radio shows, period!"
I understand this, but then what?
Do I have to put a bag on my face to look like it's not me? Should I shut up and be invisible?
Let's be serious! I have to join the fray!
But I must select the shows I go to, I don't want to be treated like an object.
That's what the system wants, to turn you into an object.
It creates a buzz, it puts you in a box... I know what they expect me to say, so I play with their expectations.
I do this to draw a bit of the public attention , but I need to bypass the system.
So we created a good system.
I think it is quite efficient, because something like 541,000 people subscribed to my Facebook page.
541,000 people, it's like a show with a good audience.
Almost 900,000 people follow me on Twitter.
It would have been a dream for me back when I was a young political activist who just handed out his damn tracts on the street.
You just type 140 characters and poof! 900,000 people get it!
And there's this Youtube channel of course!
It made a sudden breakthrough since we are now 70,000 subscribers.
We're also the leading political channel in  France.
Of course, some Youtubers have a thousand time more subscribers than I have, but they're in their own domain.
I'm in politics, people aren't crazy about that!
The number of subscribers is going to grow as the election is drawing near,
but you're right Pierre, it's a way of bypassing the system.
Someone made a criticism that was a bit nasty. This person said:
"Look! He's boasting of using his own communication tools, but he's trying to avoid embarrassing questions!"
Ha, ha! Embarrassing questions in the official media!
What embarrassing questions? They're all written beforehand!
They think I don't know the questions they'll ask me!
But it doesn't matter! As long as they believe it, they're off my back!
@Damien Charpentier:
"Hello Mr. Mélenchon, you are now on Youtube, on Facebook, on Twitter, on Instagram, and even on Snapchat!"
Are you trying to get closer to the young, or are you just addicted to social media?"
Well, I must admit that I'm getting addicted to it, and it's not a good thing!
By the way, you're all spending more time on your smartphone than anything else,
more than people in front of you sometimes.
Beware!
I mean I use these tools, so I won't lecture at you about it,
but it does look like an addiction, meaning that you lost control over them
and that it makes you suffer when you can't use them.
It reminds me of when I was a smoker, it was the same!
I smoked and smoked, and I couldn't quit.
And now, I sometimes think it is the same with my smartphone.
I have it with me everywhere I go, and when I don't, I feel stressed, and I wonder what's going to happen.
I think we went a bit too far. So I'm not an addict... I mean I am, but I try not to.
Now do I want to speak to the young? Not at all!
I don't speak to the young, and then to blond-haired people, then to brown-haired people, then to the elderly...
I speak to everyone, and I speak to everyone in the same way.
I don't speak differently just because I speak to a young person.
I speak in the same way because I think that we all have the same intellectual abilities to understand each other
if everyone tries to speak a language that others can understand.
This is true for everyone, you know? The problem with politicians
is that they often think they have a code in their head and that no one knows it.
This is true of every occupation.
When you speak to someone who is addicted to his job, you'll see
that often, you won't understand anything when he speaks.
So, no, I speak to everyone in the same way,
and I use these tools in order to bypass the official media
and also as a way of - let's tell it like it is -
being more creative, for the thrill of doing things.
@Dimichu asks:
"How is your campaign funded? :)"
So... There's a smiley face at the end, so I suppose @Dimichu means "This is your chance to tell us".
Well I will, thank you! My campaign is funded by people's contributions.
I can't continue to campaign if I don't get funds.
I also got a loan from the Parti de Gauche (Left Party), the only party that helped funding the campaign,
and normally, I should be able to pay off this loan at the end of the campaign.
I mean the banker would follow me to hell to get his money back.
The Parti de Gauche will get its money back too.
And those who gave money get a... you know, a tax deduction slip.
They can get a tax deduction that amounts to 60% of the sum they gave me.
You might argue that "you have to pay taxes in the first place". OK, that's true,
but for those who do pay taxes, you get a 60% deduction!
I don't think people should get a tax deduction for giving money to a movement, but it's possible and it's the law!
So that's how we fund the campaign, and we just started a fund-raiser.
I must admit that we like big paychecks, but there's a 4,500€ legal limit.
We do like big paychecks, that's true,
but we also like it when you send us money each month, it's easier and we take it all!
We take it all because when you see all the money that the Republican party collected
with their primary election... I mean well done! Well done!
10 million€! 10 million€ in two rounds!
And among the voters, you find 400,000 "left-wing" simpletons who payed 2€
to vote for one candidate in order to prevent another candidate to run for president...
This is crazy! They were fooled, but can you realize that they gave...
They were 400,000 "left-wing" voters apparently, some say 600,000, but I'll use the lowest figure
so that they don't feel ashamed too much. So how much does 400,000 multiplied by 2€?
800,000€! Why did they not give it to me?
So you want to give money to the right? Instead of me? Come on...!
Anyway, I'm sure you did not! But you can make a donation, it will be welcome!
"What can you say to those who think the far right is already in the second round of the elction?"
That's @Hugo's question, and here's my answer.
It is a mistake to think that you can know the result of an election in advance.
The election has to take place to know the result.
So, listen! I don't want to reveal this secret,
but thinking that the far right will reach the second round of the election is convenient for a lot of people.
They're doing this for the second time. The did the same in 2012.
They announced that they would be in the second round bla bla, but they were not!
So it is convenient for a lot of people,
but what is interesting is that some people believe their own propaganda
So they organize their campaign according to a prediction that might not become true.
All this is great, isn't it? There's no better way to make a mistake
than believing the lies you tell others.
So saying Mrs. Le Pen will reach the second round is convenient for a lot of people.
As for me, I couldn't care less because all I can do is convince voters.
Besides, what's the point of standing as a candidate if you don't think you can convince voters?
An election is not a game. Voters aren't kids, they're adults!
They're citizens, and citizens think!
@Florent Rué:
"Don't you think shareholders will back off if their voting rights are modulated according to the duration of their investments in a company?"
No it won't!
But first, you need to understand.
I propose that shareholders' voting rights be proportionate to the duration of their investment,
which means that someone who says "Well I'll invest money"
"For how long, Sir?"
"It's none of your business!"
"Yes it is, because if you take your money back, my company will go out of business!"
So to me, shareholders should say how long they want to invest their money.
For instance, if you don't want to say how long - it's your right -
if you don't want to say how long you want to invest, then you won't have any voting right as a shareholder.
If you want to choose the minimum investment period, let's say 3 years, or 5,
then you will get half a voting right per share,
and if it's 10 years, then you will get a full voting right per action.
But you might argue that it's not an anti-capitalist measure.
Well I'm talking about listed companies here.
Did you get the point? This measure aims at preventing vampires to hit the road with the funds of a company.
Those who do that are called "vulture funds", that's their specialty. I'll tell you how they do that.
They contract a loan from a bank... You always find money when you play these dirty tricks!
Thank you bankers!
So they buy a company, and once they own it, they suck out all the company's funds to pay back their loan.
Sometimes they keep the company working a bit to get some surplus value.
So they pay back their loan, and then they sell all the rest:
patents, the order book, even the building sometimes - the walls, the floor, everything!
You might not be aware of it because you're not used to this kind of things,
but there was a company that was part of a larger former company, a chemical company,
I think the name was "Kem One".
They made PVC. They really were great guys!
PVC is used to make gutters, things like that...
It was the only company that did that in France! There were 3 factories!
A guy bought it for 1€! Can you believe that?
1€!
There were 2,900 employees and 3 factories, and do you know what the guy did?
He thought a 10% benefit was not enough,
so he sold it all! Everything!
We have to prevent shareholders who buy a company from selling it, they production  tools,
and by this I don't mean business and all these liberal tall tales,
I mean machines and workers, people who have skills.
So will that deter people from investing? Well no, on the contrary!
Suppose you have a few savings. You want to invest it in a company that does well,
not a company that will make you say: "What?
A hedge fund bought shares in this company? I want to get out of this thing!"
Because the hedge fund or the pension fund can hit the road whenever it wants,
and you'll lose all your savings because the company will go bankrupt.
So on the contrary, we will give stability to investors.
Now, listen! If you have doubts about this, let me give you another argument.
There was a time when business was going well in Brazil
- it's no longer the case right now - but it did.
There was private money all over the place, in every company,
and what did Brazilians do?
They asked for term deposits. They said: "Brazil is not a station hall,
so if you want to invest, you have to leave a term deposit,
and if you want to leave in less than 3 years, you can, but we'll keep the deposit.
And this was not a joke! There were deposits of 10 or 20%
the total investment, these were susbstantial deposits!
You see? And it did not prevent business from going well.
What really matters is the order book, because if it is full,
then you can be sure that someone will pay the machines and the workers.
I hope I answered your question.
@Nadia Fufette asks: "You have been a whistleblower on TAFTA and then CETA..."
- TAFTA is the free trade agreement with the USA,
and CETA is the free trade agreement with CANADA -
"Please tell us about TISA that is being negotiated in Geneva".
I already did it on my blog in June 2014,
so you can find all the information there.
So yes, a treaty is being negotiated in order to - no need to be a smart cookie
to know what's going on - in order to make privatizations, to hit public services,
to prevent states and local authorities from creating new public services that could compete with the private sector.
It's a sort of Fillon-like global tendency that they try to implement (François Fillon=French conservative politician).
We will oppose it, of course, because this treaty would be the end of France and French public services.
You should understand that public services mutualize some services, they are cheaper than private services,
but they try to make you think it is the contrary. But it's a lie, it's logical, everyone can understand that.
If a public service provides citizens with a quality service, it has to be controled, but it provides you with a service.
Now a private service is not a monopoly, so there are at least 2 or 3 different companies,
and as a consequence, there are advertisement fees that are unnecessary in the public service.
Private services are also a waste of money!
Why making different investments to provide people with the same service? Why?
Why doing things twice, thrice or more? It's a waste of money on the scale of society.
I hope you're not stupid enough to believe
that you don't pay private services' additional costs in the end, because you always pay them one way or another.
When you buy products, you give money to capital that takes its share,
while the rest of the money is used to buy machines. But you always pay it in the end.
So read my blog article on the subject. My blog is a powerful tool.
It is the leading political blog in the country... or the second maybe, and I'm proud of that.
You can find this article in the articles of June 2014.
@Lassalas Maxime:
"What is your opinion on whistleblowers like Assange and Snowden?
Would you accept to grant them asylum in France?
Ok, so let me give you a piece of information, and let's see when it reaches the official media.
Let me tell you very solemnly that my opinion on Assange and Snowden
is that they did a great service to democracy and freedom in the world
when they revealed how the USA spied on everyone,
our country in particular, as well as the political and economic leaders of our country.
We owe Mr Assange and Mr Snowden a lot.
Now, what will I do if I am elected President of France?
Well I will grant French citizenship to Mr Assange and Mr Snowden,
and as they will be our fellow citizens, I will ask  the countries where they are living now
to allow them to come to France, their new country,
where they'll be able to travel freely and to live their life freely.
You probably know that Mr Assange has been living in a tiny room for three years.
I visited him once.
He cannot leave the room, because the police is waiting for him outside,
in order to arrest him under the pretext of... There's always a good reason!
The police would arrest him under the pretext of a so-called rape case in Sweden.
There is a legal action against him, but he was neither indicted nor sentenced!
It's just a legal action!
He's always said he would agree to answer the prosecutor's questions,
but he refuses to leave the embassy without the guarantee that he won't be arrested,
because if he agreed to leave the embassy to answer the prosecutor's questions,
the Swedes would extradite him to the USA - they already did that once -
and Americans would put him in jail incommunicado as they did with his friend Chelsea Manning
who's been held incommunicado and ill-treated for many years.
North-Americans are violent and crual people.
For instance, there's an official torture center in Guantanamo, on the island of Cuba.
They were vicious enough to set this center in Cuba! There's an American military base there.
Many people have been tortured there for years, and it's done officially, because a law was voted.
That's American democracy you know. This law makes waterboarding legal.
A prisoner's head can be dipped into water until they are almost drowned, but not completely, that would be crual you know!
So they passed this law, and everyone knows this, it could not be more official!
There are CIA's secret prisons in Europe, but shhh! Don't say a word about this!
Now when the media talk about Cuba, they don't talk about Guantanamo's torture center.
They rather accuse Fidel and Raul Castro of being dictators.
Sorry, I'm a bit off the topic. So first, I'll grant them French citizenship.
Second, I'll ask the countries in which they are living now, that is, Russia in the case of Mr Snowden,
and the UK in the case of Mr Assange, to allow them to come to their country, France.
And once they'll be in France, I think that... Of course I would do this if I become President of the Republic,
I could not do this if I was not.
Well I would decorate them. Since the President of the Republic is the highest authority of the Legion of Honor,
I would present them with the Legion of Honor for services to the nation.
Ok, so... If I am elected, I will do it, mark my words!
I want the whole world to know that France will not be spied on with impunity.
I want the whole world to know that we have the right to access the information collected by Mr Assange and Mr Snowden.
Ok. So now is the time to reveal a secret piece of news.
I will soon meet Mr Assange again, and probably Mr Snowden too.
I'll tell you more about that next time.
So you should listen to Jean-Luc Mélenchon's answers in his FAQs,
because you might find information that you won't find elsewhere.
This is all for this FAQ.
I will answer other questions in a new video, because I already answered more than 20 questions today.
If you liked the video, let me know by giving me the blue thumbs up,
and... I mean one blue thumb per person, and subscribe to my channel
because everyone can see it when the channel's audience is increasing,
and it gives courage to those who are working on the videos, and it gives me courage.
Besides, this informal way of informing is helpful.
And if it works for me, it works for other politicians, who could do the same out of jealousy,
and maybe it will enable you to know about people you didn't know before.
Thank you and see you soon!